Add documentation for the UBI plugin (#7284)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/ubi/ubi-dashboard-tutorial.md

Index patterns are how OpenSearch dashboards access your indexes. In this case, we want to access the indexes that UBI creates, so that we can visualize your users' online, search behaviors.

After you click on "Create index pattern" you'll see a list of indexes in your OpenSearch instance. The UBI stores may be hidden by default; so, be sure to click on "Include system and hidden indexes". 
![Index Patterns]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/index_pattern2.png "Index Patterns")

With wildcards you can group indexes into the same data source for your dashboard. So we'll lump both the query and event stores together as `ubi_*`.

It will prompt you to filter on any `date` field in your schema, so that you can look at things like trending queries over the last 15 minutes. However, for your first dashboard, do not filter on any date field. 
<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/index_pattern3.png" alt="Index Patterns" width="400"/>

 Click on "Create index pattern", and you're ready to start building your dashboard pointing to your UBI store.

## 3) Create a new dashboard
http://localhost:5601/app/OpenSearch_dashboards_overview#/

> ![First Dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/first_dashboard.png "First Dashboard")

Reviewer: I agree - ok to remove this image.

---
layout: default
title: UBI dashboard tutorial
parent: User Behavior Insights
has_children: false
nav_order: 25
---

# UBI dashboard tutorial

Whether you've been collecting user events and queries for a while or [you've uploaded some sample events](https://github.com/o19s/chorus-OpenSearch-edition/blob/main/katas/003_import_preexisting_event_data.md), you're now ready to visualize the data collected through User Behavior Insights (UBI) in a dashboard in OpenSearch.

To quickly view a dashboard without completing the full tutorial, do the following:
1. Download and save the [sample UBI dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/assets/examples/ubi-dashboard.ndjson).
1. On the top menu, go to **Management > Dashboard Management**.
1. In the **Dashboards** panel, choose **Saved objects**.
1. In the upper-right corner, select **Import**.
1. In the **Select file** panel, choose **Import**.
1. Select the UBI dashboard file that you downloaded and select the **Import** button.

## 1. Start OpenSearch Dashboards

> Start OpenSearch Dashboards. For example, go to `http://{server}:5601/app/home#/`. For more information, see [OpenSearch Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/). The following image shows the home page:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start OpenSearch Dashboards. For example, go to `http://{server}:5601/app/home#/`. For more information, see [OpenSearch Dashboards]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/). The following image shows the home page.
```

Save the visualization so that it's added to your new dashboard. Now that you have a visualization displayed on your dashboard, you can save the dashboard.

## 4. Add a tag cloud visualization

Now you'll add a word cloud for trending searches by creating a new visualization, similarly to the previous step.  

In the **New Visualization** window, select **Tag Cloud**, and then select the index pattern you created in step 2. Choose the tag cloud visualization of the terms in the `message` field where the JavaScript client logs the raw search text. Note: The true query, as processed by OpenSearch with filters, boosting, and so on, resides in the `ubi_queries` index. However, you'll view the `message` field of the `ubi_events` index, where the JavaScript client captures the text that the user actually typed. 

The following image shows the tag cloud visualization on the `message` field.
![Word Cloud]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/tag_cloud1.png "Word Cloud")

The underlying queries can be found at [SQL trending queries]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/ubi/sql-queries/#trending-queries).
{: .note} 

> The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every event, and as a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.

Reviewer 2: What do we mean by "may not be exactly what you're looking for"? Can we be a little more precise? Do we mean something like "may not appear as expected"?

Reviewer 3: Reworded

> The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every event, and as a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resulting visualization may contain different information than you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every event, and as a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.
```

> The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every ---not only query/search s---and can be used in any way desired. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every event, and as a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.
```
?

> To view only search terms for query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Because the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter by that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer 2: Who is "the developer"? Can we please remove/rephrase?

Reviewer 3: Reworded

> To view only search terms for query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Because the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter by that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To view only search terms for query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Because during setup you provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter by that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 
```

![Pie Chart]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/pie.png "Pie Chart")

Save the visualization so it's added to your new dashboard. Now that you have a visualization on your dashboard, you can save the dashboard.

## 4. Add a tag cloud visualization

Now you'll add a word cloud for trending searches by creating a new visualization, similar to the previous step.  

In the **New Visualization** window, select **Tag Cloud**, then select the index pattern you created in Step 2. Choose the Tag Cloud visualization of the terms in the `message` field where the JavaScript client logs the raw text that the user searches on.  (Note: The true query, as processed by OpenSearch with filters, boosting, and so on, resides in the `ubi_queries` index. However, you'll view the `message` field of the `ubi_events` index, where the JavaScript client captures the text that the user actually typed.) 

The following image shows the tag cloud visualization on the `message` field.
![Word Cloud]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/tag_cloud1.png "Word Cloud")

> The underlying queries can be found under [SQL trending queries]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/ubi/sql-queries/#trending-queries).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The underlying queries can be found at [SQL trending queries]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/ubi/sql-queries/#trending-queries).
```

{: .note} 

> The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated on every event---not only query/search events---and can be used in any way the client developer decides to use it. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated with every event---not only query/search events---and can be used in any way desired. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.
```

> The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated on every event---not only query/search events---and can be used in any way the client developer decides to use it. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.

Reviewer 2: What do we mean by "may not be exactly what you're looking for"? Can we be a little more precise? Do we mean something like "may not appear as expected"?

> To view only search terms on query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Since the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter on that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To view only search terms for query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Because the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter by that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 
```

> To view only search terms on query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Since the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter on that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer 2: Who is "the developer"? Can we please remove/rephrase?

![Word Cloud]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/tag_cloud2.png "Word Cloud")

> You should now have two visualizations (the pie chart and the tag cloud) on your dashboard, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There should now be two visualizations (the pie chart and the tag cloud) displayed on your dashboard, as shown in the following image.
```

![UBI Dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/dashboard2.png "UBI Dashboard")

## 5. Add a histogram of item clicks

> Now you'll add a histogram visualization to your dashboard, similar to the previous step. In the **New Visualization** window, select **Vertical Bar**. Then select the index pattern you created in Step 2. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you'll add a histogram visualization to your dashboard, similarly to the previous step. In the **New Visualization** window, select **Vertical Bar**. Then select the index pattern you created in step 2. 
```

> The data field you want to examine is `event_attributes.position.ordinal`. This field contains the position of the item in a list that the user selected. For the histogram visualization, the x-axis will be the ordinal number of the selected item (n). The y-axis will be the number of times that the nth item was clicked, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examine the `event_attributes.position.ordinal` data field. This field contains the position of the item in a list selected by the user. For the histogram visualization, the x-axis represents the ordinal number of the selected item (n). The y-axis represents the number of times that the nth item was clicked, as shown in the following image. 
```

![Vertical Bar Chart]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/histogram.png "Vertical Bar Chart")

> ## 6) Have fun slicing and dicing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 6) Filter the displayed data
```

> ## 6) Have fun slicing and dicing

Reviewer 2: The original here is too informal.

Now you can further filter the displayed data. For example, let's see how the click position changes when there is a purchase. Select **Add filter** and then select the `action_name:product_purchase` field, as shown in the following image.
![Product Purchase]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/product_purchase.png "Product Purchase")

> You can filter event messages containing the word `*laptop*` by adding wildcards, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer 2: Does `*laptop*` need to be formatted this way, or should it just be in quotation marks?

Reviewer: Yes. In one of my edits, I removed the asterisks and Jason said they are needed added them back.

---
layout: default

> title: UBI Dashboard Tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: UBI dashboard tutorial
```

> parent: User behavior insights

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parent: User Behavior Insights
```

has_children: false

> nav_order: 7

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nav_order: 25
```

---

> # Build an analytic dashboard for UBI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# UBI dashboard tutorial
```
Or "Building a UBI dashboard"

> Whether you've been collecting user events and queries for a while, or [you uploaded some sample events](https://github.com/o19s/chorus-OpenSearch-edition/blob/main/katas/003_import_preexisting_event_data.md), now you're ready to visualize them in an OpenSearch Dashboards dashboard using User Behavior Insights (UBI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether you've been collecting user events and queries for a while, or [you've uploaded some sample events](https://github.com/o19s/chorus-OpenSearch-edition/blob/main/katas/003_import_preexisting_event_data.md), you're now ready to visualize the data collected through UBI in a dashboard in OpenSearch.
```

> To quickly view a dashboard without following the tutorial, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To quickly view a dashboard without doing the full tutorial, do the following:
```

> To view the resulting dashboard without following the tutorial, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To quickly view a dashboard without following the tutorial, follow these steps:
```

1. Download and save the [sample UBI dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/assets/examples/ubi-dashboard.ndjson).
1. On the top menu, go to **Management > Dashboard Management**.
1. From the **Dashboards** panel, choose **Saved objects**.
1. In the upper right corner, select **Import**.
1. In the **Select file** panel, choose **Import**.
1. Select the UBI dashboard file that you downloaded and select the **Import** button.

## 1. Start OpenSearch Dashboards

Depending on your configuration: `http://{server}:5601/app/home#/`
![Dashboard Home]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/home.png "Dashboards")
{: .note} 

## 2. Create an index pattern

> Within OpenSearch Management navigate to **Dashboards Management > Index patterns**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within OpenSearch Management, navigate to **Dashboards Management > Index patterns**.
```

`http://{server}:5601/app/management/OpenSearch-dashboards/indexPatterns`

> It will look something like the following.

Reviewer: Is this here by mistake?

Author: ah, the image was suggested to be removed

> OpenSearch Dashboards access your indexes using index patterns. To visualize your users' online search behavior, you must create an index pattern in order to access the indexes that UBI creates. For more information, see [Index patterns]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/management/index-patterns/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch Dashboards accesses your indexes using index patterns. To visualize your users' online search behavior, you must create an index pattern in order to access the indexes that UBI creates. For more information, see [Index patterns]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/dashboards/management/index-patterns/).
```

> After you select **Create index pattern**, you'll see a list of indexes in your OpenSearch instance. The UBI stores may be hidden by default, so be sure to select **Include system and hidden indexes**, as shown in the following image. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you select **Create index pattern**, a list of indexes in your OpenSearch instance is displayed. The UBI stores may be hidden by default, so make sure to select **Include system and hidden indexes**, as shown in the following image. 
```

You can group indexes into the same data source for your dashboard using wildcards. For this tutorial we'll combine the query and event stores into the `ubi_*` pattern.

OpenSearch Dashboards prompts you to filter on any `date` field in your schema, so that you can look at things like trending queries over the last 15 minutes. However, for your first dashboard, select **I don't want to use the time filter**, as shown in the following image. 
<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/index_pattern3.png" alt="Index Patterns" width="400"/>

> After selecting **Create index pattern, you're ready to start building a dashboard that displays the UBI store data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After selecting **Create index pattern**, you're ready to start building a dashboard that displays the UBI store data.
```

After selecting **Create index pattern, you're ready to start building a dashboard that displays the UBI store data.

## 3. Create a new dashboard

> To create a new dashboard, on the top menu go to **OpenSearch Dashboards > Dashboards**, then select **Create > Dashboard** and choose **Create new**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new dashboard, on the top menu select **OpenSearch Dashboards > Dashboards**, then **Create > Dashboard** > **Create new**.
```

> If you haven't previously created a dashboard, you should see something like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't previously created a dashboard, you are presented with the option to create a new dashboard. Otherwise, previously created dashboards are displayed.
```

> ![First Dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/first_dashboard.png "First Dashboard")

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

![First Dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/first_dashboard.png "First Dashboard")

> Otherwise, you will see previously created dashboards here.

Reviewer: Remove, as it can be combined as in the previous suggestion.

> {: .note} 

Reviewer: Remove.

![Pie Chart]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/pie.png "Pie Chart")

> Save that visualization so it is added to your new dashboard. Now that you have a visualization on your dashboard, you can save your dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Save the visualization so it's added to your new dashboard. Now that you have a visualization on your dashboard, you can save the dashboard.
```

Most visualizations require some sort of aggregate function on an bucket/facet/aggregatable field (numeric or keyword). You'll add a `Terms` aggregation on the `action_name` field so that you can view the distribution of event names. Change the **Size** to the number of slices you want to display, as shown in the following image.
![Pie Chart]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/pie.png "Pie Chart")

Save that visualization so it is added to your new dashboard. Now that you have a visualization on your dashboard, you can save your dashboard.

## 4. Add a tag cloud visualization

> Now you'll add a word cloud for trending searches by creating a new visualization, similar to the previous step.  In the **New Visualization** window, select **Tag Cloud**. Then select the index pattern you created in Step 2. Choose the Tag Cloud visualization of the terms in the `message` field where the JavaScript client logs the raw text that the user searches on.  (Note: The true query, as processed by OpenSearch with filters, boosting, and so on, resides in the `ubi_queries` index. However, you'll view the `message` field of the `ubi_events` index, where the Javascript client captures the text that the user actually typed.) The following image shows the tag cloud visualization on the `message` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you'll add a word cloud for trending searches by creating a new visualization, similar to the previous step.  

In the **New Visualization** window, select **Tag Cloud**, then select the index pattern you created in Step 2. Choose the Tag Cloud visualization of the terms in the `message` field where the JavaScript client logs the raw text that the user searches on.  (Note: The true query, as processed by OpenSearch with filters, boosting, and so on, resides in the `ubi_queries` index. However, you'll view the `message` field of the `ubi_events` index, where the JavaScript client captures the text that the user actually typed.) 

The following image shows the tag cloud visualization on the `message` field.
```

![Word Cloud]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/tag_cloud1.png "Word Cloud")

The underlying queries can be found under [SQL trending queries]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/ubi/sql-queries/#trending-queries).
{: .note} 

> However, this visualization is not exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated on every event---not only query/search events---and can be used in any way the client developer decides to use it. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting visualization may not be exactly what you're looking for. The `message` field is updated on every event---not only query/search events---and can be used in any way the client developer decides to use it. As a result, it can contain error messages, debug messages, click information, and other unwanted data.
```

To view only search terms on query events, you need to add a filter to your visualization. Since the developer provided a `message_type` of `QUERY` for each search event, you can filter on that message type to isolate the specific users' searches. To do this, select **Add filter** and then select **QUERY** in the **Edit filter** panel, as shown in the following image. 
![Word Cloud]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/tag_cloud2.png "Word Cloud")

> You should now have two visualizations on your dashboard (the pie chart and the tag cloud), as shown in the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now have two visualizations (the pie chart and the tag cloud) on your dashboard, as shown in the following image.
```

![UBI Dashboard]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/dashboard2.png "UBI Dashboard")

## 5. Add a histogram of item clicks

Now you'll add a histogram visualization to your dashboard, similar to the previous step. In the **New Visualization** window, select **Vertical Bar**. Then select the index pattern you created in Step 2. 

The data field you want to examine is `event_attributes.position.ordinal`. This field contains the position of the item in a list that the user selected. For the histogram visualization, the x-axis will be the ordinal number of the selected item (n). The y-axis will be the number of times that the nth item was clicked, as shown in the following image. 

![Vertical Bar Chart]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/histogram.png "Vertical Bar Chart")

## 6) Have fun slicing and dicing

Now you can further filter the displayed data. For example, let's see how the click position changes when there is a purchase. Select **Add filter** and then select the `action_name:product_purchase` field, as shown in the following image.
![Product Purchase]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/ubi/product_purchase.png "Product Purchase")

> You can filter event messages containing the word "\*laptop\*" by adding wildcards, as shown in the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can filter event messages containing the word *laptop* by adding wildcards, as shown in the following image.
```

Author: The asterisks are part of the query.  I'll change to code formatting to help make that clearer
